h1. VERY MUCH WORK IN PROGRESS

Sequenceserver is CURRENTLY AT PRERELEASE STAGE. So please don't expect much for now. Drop us a line & we'll keep you posted on the release of 1.0. 

Check <a href='http://www.sequenceserver.com/'>sequenceserver.com</a> for info & screenshots.

Authors: "Anurag Priyam":http://yeban.in/ & "Yannick Wurm":http://yannick.poulet.org.


"Todo list here":http://github.com/yannickwurm/sequenceServer/wiki


h2. Rationale/aim

Biologists constantly  generate new sequence data... but the people who want to access the data are often not computational, so they need some kind of point & click & copy & paste interface. It's a common issue. See for example "this question":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1890285/are-there-any-existing-solutions-for-creating-a-generic-dna-sequence-database-wit/1893358 .


Alternatives: The "GMOD":http://www.gmod.org software can be overkill. But it's blast form is limited when dealing with several databases. All publicly available blast web wrappers are ugly and horrible for users.


The idea is to make a blast server that is simple to set up & maintain (for the administrator), and pleasant to use (by thinking for user). 


h3. Features for the admin): CURRENTLY AT PRERELEASE STAGE
 * no hassle - just run it using ruby's internal server. Setup is easy.
 * autodetection of new blast databases
 * Not YET IMPLEMENTED: automagic setup. "gem install" + point it at blast binaries and fasta database files --> youre good to go. (using ruby's internal Webrick server avoids overhead normally associated with admin)



h3. Features for the user: CURRENTLY AT PRERELEASE STAGE
 * simple, elegant interface
 * links in the results that let you fetch the original sequences of the database hits (by providing links to individual hits, and batch download of all hits). 
 * NOT YET PERFECT: autodetection of whether the use entered nucleotide or aminoacid sequence --> dynamically updated availability of blast methods
 * NOT YET PERFECT: blast method implies which database can be used (dynamically updated list of available databases)




h2. Requirements
* ruby 1.8.7 or later. The following ruby gems will self-install: "sinatra":http://www.sinatrarb.com/
* NCBI Blastplus: http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?CMD=Web&PAGE_TYPE=BlastDocs&DOC_TYPE=Download Old versions of NCBI blast (pre 2.2.18) are not supported.


All blast databases must be formatted. Eg: 
* *for protein:* @makeblastdb -dbtype prot -title 'my ant proteins'    -in myProteinDatabase.fasta -parse_seqids@
* *for nucleotide*: @makeblastdb -dbtype nucl -title 'official geneset 1' -in myNucleotideDatabase.fasta -parse_seqids@

h2. Launching

* @ruby sequenceserver.rb@  or @ruby -p 8080 sequenceserver.rb@       --> commandline will display address of web server (default: "http://localhost:4567":http://localhost:4567)


h2. FAQ:
 
*Why doesn't sequence retrieval work?*
Probably because you forgot the @-parse_seqids@ argument when running makeblastdb (or they were formated using legacy @formatdb@. To indicate that a sequence is from a non-@-parse_seqids@ database, Blastplus 2.2.24 puts a space between the '>' and the hit identifier. 

*Can I change the path to sequence databases? The path to blast binaries?*
Edit the @config.yml.example@ file and rename it @config.yml@

*Can I change the web server port?*
Specify @-p 8080@ on the commandline when launching.  
